unm-guide/index.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: UNM New Arrival Guide
excerpt: "An unofficial guide for Amrita students planning to study at UNM."

image:
  feature: so-simple-sample-image-4.jpg
  credit: WeGraphics
  creditlink: http://wegraphics.net/downloads/free-ultimate-blurred-background-pack/
---
(An unofficial guide for students from [Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham](https://www.amrita.edu/) planning to study at the [University of New Mexico](https://www.unm.edu/)).

If you've been admitted to UNM, congratulations!

I was an undergrad exchange student at UNM during Spring 2016, and I'm currenly in their CS Master's program.

I plan to maintain this article as a living document at least until I graduate from UNM.

---  

**Table of Contents**

1. [Academics](#academics)
2. [Accomodation](#accomodation)
3. [Food](#food)
4. [Life in Albuquerque](#life-in-albuquerque)
5. [Visa](#visa)

### Academics

UNM has an [online catalog](http://catalog.unm.edu/catalogs/2017-2018/) of all its courses that displays the course number, name, description, number of credits, and pre-requisites if any. Check it out (Google "unm catalog" or something).

Once all your paperwork is done and you're actually admitted into UNM, that's when you should register for classes. You do it online through a mechanism similar to [AUMS](https://www.amrita.edu/aums). Seats are limited for all courses, and the seats fill up quickly. Do not delay the registration if you wish to get into your preferred courses. Keep in mind that certain category of students get the opportunity to register earlier than certain other categories of students. For instance, grad students can register earlier than undergrads.

A course here typically has 3 credits. U.S. government rules (not UNM rules) stipulate the minimum number of credits international students must register for each semester. The last time I checked (please re-check!), it was:

1. 12 credits for international undergrad exchange students.
2. 9 credits for international grad students.
3. 6 credits for international grad students who are a TA or an RA.

"Grad" is the same thing as "postgraduate" in India.

Be forewarned: those 9 credits require a lot more work than 30 credits per sem' in Amrita!

You have to do a bit of homework before you register. Timings for certain classes clash; choose classes such that none of them are at the same time.

Courses here are generally excellent, yet intense. By the time you take 4 subjects, you will be pretty loaded, and will have little free time. If a subject seems too difficult, you can drop it and register for another one within the first couple of weeks after the start of classes. You'll have to check on that.

For most courses, there will be lectures twice or thrice a week, each lasting between 50 to 90 minutes. Labs (if applicable) will be in addition to the lectures.

Expect lots of assignments. These assignments alone will take up almost all your free time. The upside of blazing through these assignments is that you'll have an easier time on the actual tests. Sure you're going to have to study and really understand the material at hand, but once you do that then you will *usually* be able to score well.

Teachers are helpful, and would answer your questions candidly. Take advantage of their office hours to understand the material at hand, and also to get help with the homeworks.

The [libraries on campus](http://library.unm.edu/) are huge with [over 3 million books.](https://library.unm.edu/about/dean/3million.php) However, your prescribed textbooks would likely not be in the library owing to reasons that are beyond the scope of this article.

Textbooks are expensive. Price of a new textbook ranges between $20 and $200 (over Rs. 12000!). I recommend used textbooks; they are cheaper and quality is on par with brand new books.

There are multiple ways to obtain textbooks:

* Purchase them through UNM Bookstore.
* Purchase them online through Amazon.
* Rent your textbooks; you pay less than the actual price of the book, but you'll have to return the book at the end of the semester. (And no, you don't get your money back).

You do have the option of purchasing used books from Amazon and UNM Bookstore (subject to availability). UNM Bookstore is located right next to the campus. You'll find your textbooks there if your instructor requested it beforehand. They also sell other items like stationery, UNM branded clothing and accessories, certain electronic gadgets etc. The bookstore sometimes offer buy-backs at the end of the semester; use this opportunity to recover part of your investment in textbooks.

##### Useful Links

1. UNM course catalog [http://catalog.unm.edu/catalogs/2017-2018/](http://catalog.unm.edu/catalogs/2017-2018/)
2. [Schedule of classes for Fall 2017](http://www.unm.edu/~rst/Schedule_of_Classes/Fall2017/SCHM/index.html)
2. UNM Bookstore [https://bookstore.unm.edu/](https://bookstore.unm.edu/)


### Accomodation
You can either choose to live on-campus or off-campus. I've always lived on-campus here because of the safety, security, and convenience it offers. Living off-campus might be cheaper.

To live on campus, you have to register on their [official website](https://housing.unm.edu) beforehand and make advance payment. "Hostels" in UNM are actually called "residence halls" (you don't say "hostel" in UNM). There are several halls to choose from, all with different number of roommates and amenities.

The rooms on campus are neat and clean. At a minimum, you get:

* Bed and cot
* Desk with lockable drawer
* Chair
* Adequate shelves to store your things

You have to bring your own bedsheets, blankets, pillows etc.

Laundry facility is included. There are common washing-machines and dryers. Takes about 30 minutes to wash and 45 minutes to dry. Bathrooms aren't attached in all halls.

Check the [UNM Housing website](https://housing.unm.edu) for details of different types of rooms, their prices etc.

You get a free mailbox, but you have to explicitly sign up for it. Helps if you buy stuff from Amazon. Besides, you need an address before you can, say, start a bank account.

*And did I mention there's free WiFi everywhere on campus?*

Note that **deciding to live on campus temporarily until you find an accommodation off-campus is a bad idea; you'll be subject to massive fines.** Also, if you do sign up for on-campus housing, but never showed up for whatever reason (like, maybe you decided not to live on campus) and you don't cancel your contract before the first day of class, you'll be fined -- as of Spring 2018 -- $2350; that's nearly 1.5 lakh rupees!

##### Useful Links
1. UNM Housing [https://housing.unm.edu](https://housing.unm.edu)
2. UNM Housing Contract Cancellation [https://housing.unm.edu/living-on-campus/contract-cancellation.html](https://housing.unm.edu/living-on-campus/contract-cancellation.html)


### Food

Food is NOT included with the accommodation. You have to pay extra to get food on campus.

I assume you are not vegetarian.

There are several different places inside the campus where you'll get food. Some offer just coffee or drinks, some offer sandwiches, and some offer cuisine from around the world.

The major dining hall inside the campus is called 'La Posada' ("LaPo" in short). LaPo is open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. You get different types of predominantly non-vegetarian cuisine.

You have to pay upfront at the beginning of the semester to get food from LaPo. There are different "meal plans". The food is the same for all plans; the difference is in the number of times a day and the number of days a week you can go there.

I chose an unlimited plan -- I can go there all 7 days of the week and as many times a day as I want. For this particular plan, I paid $1950 for the whole semester.

The meal plan is applicable only for LaPo. You have to pay out of your own pocket to eat at other food outlets within the campus.

You can find information about food tariffs [here](https://www.dineoncampus.com/unm/for-residents).

As I'm not crazy about food, I was able to manage just fine. However, if you are a foodie or a vegetarian, perhaps you might want to consider other options.

Instead of choosing a meal plan, you could cook your own food. Get a room with a kitchen. Plan well and the money you save on the meal-plan would offset the higher rent of a room with kitchen.

##### Useful Links
1. UNM Dine On Campus [https://www.dineoncampus.com/unm/](https://www.dineoncampus.com/unm/)
2. [Meal plan information for 2017-2018.](http://lobocard.unm.edu/Dining-club-plans/meal-plans-2017-2018.html)


### Life in Albuquerque

Albuquerque is the largest city in the state of New Mexico. Get rid of any preconveived notions you might have about "cities in America". Albuquerque is not mighty large. I would say it is smaller than Bangalore. Perhaps comparable to Kochi, Kerala.

Though the town is relatively small, it has all the amenities you need. There are several shopping centers, and bus rides within the city is free for UNM students; to avail this facility, you need to get a particular sticker stuck onto your ID. You can get more information on that once you're here.

You could also make use of Uber for transportation within the city.

It is pretty cold during the winter. In January temperatures go well below 0&deg;C degrees at night and upto about 10&deg;C during the day. (Take a walk early in the morning, and you will see small lakes and ponds frozen solid. I'm not exaggerating).

Heaters are in all rooms so you won't have a problem indoors. But you need multiple layers of clothing when stepping out. I recommend thermals, sweaters, thin jacket(s), and a thick jacket capable of widthstanding rain and snow.

Temperatures in summer and early fall ranges from about 18&deg;C to 30&deg;C.  

There are plenty of restaurants in the city. Even a couple of Indian restaurants where the food is good in my opinion. A decent meal costs between $8 and $20. Restaurants here tend to expect a tip, like around 30% of the bill. You don't have to tip if you don't want to. They're aware that international students are usually on a tight budget.

A coffee is between $2 and $5. You would inevitably drink a lot of those 😉.

Your international friends on campus would tell you about a lot more places to go sight-seeing!

Albuquerque has its own airport located about 10 minutes away from UNM.

### Visa

The exact visa you need will be mentioned on the documents that you receive from UNM. It'll most likely be something called "F1 visa" (or J1 if you're coming on an exchange program).

Once you get the documents from UNM, apply for your visa; log in to the official U.S. govt. website and make an appointment with your nearest U.S. Consulate in India.

The visa interview is a two-day process:

* Day 1 -- they take your photograph and fingerprints.
* Day 2 -- an actual interview with an American consular officer.

You have to make appointments for both these things, and it's best if you choose consecutive days for it (you can't do both on a single day, as far as I know).

Don't believe any horror stories other people tell you about visa interviews. Precisely answer any questions they ask you, and you'll be fine. The consular officers were very friendly to me, and I had no trouble at all getting a visa.

There's a fee for the visa-application, which you pay online. I strongly recommend applying for the visa directly, instead of dealing with any middlemen or agencies.

---

The [Global Education Office (GEO)](http://geo.unm.edu/) at UNM handles all things related to international students. Check with them for accurate information and resources.

I guess that's just about it. I hope you have a great time at UNM! Good luck!

Commit message:

add information about registration issues

unm-guide/index.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: UNM New Arrival Guide
excerpt: "An unofficial guide for Amrita students planning to study at UNM."

image:
  feature: so-simple-sample-image-4.jpg
  credit: WeGraphics
  creditlink: http://wegraphics.net/downloads/free-ultimate-blurred-background-pack/
---
(An unofficial guide for students from [Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham](https://www.amrita.edu/) planning to study at the [University of New Mexico](https://www.unm.edu/)).

If you've been admitted to UNM, congratulations!

I was an undergrad exchange student at UNM during Spring 2016, and I'm currenly in their CS Master's program.

I plan to maintain this article as a living document at least until I graduate from UNM.

---  

**Table of Contents**

1. [Academics](#academics)
2. [Accomodation](#accomodation)
3. [Food](#food)
4. [Life in Albuquerque](#life-in-albuquerque)
5. [Visa](#visa)

### Academics

UNM has an [online catalog](http://catalog.unm.edu/catalogs/2017-2018/) of all its courses that displays the course number, name, description, number of credits, and pre-requisites if any. Check it out (Google "unm catalog" or something).

Once all your paperwork is done and you're actually admitted into UNM, that's when you should register for classes. You do it online through a mechanism similar to [AUMS](https://www.amrita.edu/aums). Seats are limited for all courses, and the seats fill up quickly. Do not delay the registration if you wish to get into your preferred courses. Keep in mind that certain category of students get the opportunity to register earlier than certain other categories of students. For instance, grad students can register earlier than undergrads.

A course here typically has 3 credits. U.S. government rules (not UNM rules) stipulate the minimum number of credits international students must register for each semester. The last time I checked (please re-check!), it was:

1. 12 credits for international undergrad exchange students.
2. 9 credits for international grad students.
3. 6 credits for international grad students who are a TA or an RA.

"Grad" is the same thing as "postgraduate" in India.

Be forewarned: those 9 credits require a lot more work than 30 credits per sem' in Amrita!

You have to do a bit of homework before you register. Timings for certain classes clash; choose classes such that none of them are at the same time.

Having said that, I would actually be surprised if your registration process succeeds at the first attempt.

For exchange students, as UNM most likely won't have your past academic records from your ungrad institution in their system, your course registration would be rejected because you *apparently* haven't fulfilled the pre-requisites for the advanced classes you're trying to register for. Contact your international advisor, or the professor whose course you're trying to register for; explain you're an incoming international student, and that you have the pre-requisite knowledge. They would normally take your word for it, but incase they ask be prepared to send them copies of your transcripts from your undergrad instituion.

It's a similar story with full time grad and undergrad students. I don't know about other departments, but for Computer Science atleast, you've to meet your CS department advisor personally before they allow you to register for classes.

Courses here are generally excellent, yet intense. By the time you take 4 subjects, you will be pretty loaded, and will have little free time. If a subject seems too difficult, you can drop it and register for another one within the first couple of weeks after the start of classes. You'll have to check on that.

For most courses, there will be lectures twice or thrice a week, each lasting between 50 to 90 minutes. Labs (if applicable) will be in addition to the lectures.

Expect lots of assignments. These assignments alone will take up almost all your free time. The upside of blazing through these assignments is that you'll have an easier time on the actual tests. Sure you're going to have to study and really understand the material at hand, but once you do that then you will *usually* be able to score well.

Teachers are helpful, and would answer your questions candidly. Take advantage of their office hours to understand the material at hand, and also to get help with the homeworks.

The [libraries on campus](http://library.unm.edu/) are huge with [over 3 million books.](https://library.unm.edu/about/dean/3million.php) However, your prescribed textbooks would likely not be in the library owing to reasons that are beyond the scope of this article.

Textbooks are expensive. Price of a new textbook ranges between $20 and $200 (over Rs. 12000!). I recommend used textbooks; they are cheaper and quality is on par with brand new books.

There are multiple ways to obtain textbooks:

* Purchase them through UNM Bookstore.
* Purchase them online through Amazon.
* Rent your textbooks; you pay less than the actual price of the book, but you'll have to return the book at the end of the semester. (And no, you don't get your money back).

You do have the option of purchasing used books from Amazon and UNM Bookstore (subject to availability). UNM Bookstore is located right next to the campus. You'll find your textbooks there if your instructor requested it beforehand. They also sell other items like stationery, UNM branded clothing and accessories, certain electronic gadgets etc. The bookstore sometimes offer buy-backs at the end of the semester; use this opportunity to recover part of your investment in textbooks.

##### Useful Links

1. UNM course catalog [http://catalog.unm.edu/catalogs/2017-2018/](http://catalog.unm.edu/catalogs/2017-2018/)
2. [Schedule of classes for Fall 2017](http://www.unm.edu/~rst/Schedule_of_Classes/Fall2017/SCHM/index.html)
2. UNM Bookstore [https://bookstore.unm.edu/](https://bookstore.unm.edu/)


### Accomodation
You can either choose to live on-campus or off-campus. I've always lived on-campus here because of the safety, security, and convenience it offers. Living off-campus might be cheaper.

To live on campus, you have to register on their [official website](https://housing.unm.edu) beforehand and make advance payment. "Hostels" in UNM are actually called "residence halls" (you don't say "hostel" in UNM). There are several halls to choose from, all with different number of roommates and amenities.

The rooms on campus are neat and clean. At a minimum, you get:

* Bed and cot
* Desk with lockable drawer
* Chair
* Adequate shelves to store your things

You have to bring your own bedsheets, blankets, pillows etc.

Laundry facility is included. There are common washing-machines and dryers. Takes about 30 minutes to wash and 45 minutes to dry. Bathrooms aren't attached in all halls.

Check the [UNM Housing website](https://housing.unm.edu) for details of different types of rooms, their prices etc.

You get a free mailbox, but you have to explicitly sign up for it. Helps if you buy stuff from Amazon. Besides, you need an address before you can, say, start a bank account.

*And did I mention there's free WiFi everywhere on campus?*

Note that **deciding to live on campus temporarily until you find an accommodation off-campus is a bad idea; you'll be subject to massive fines.** Also, if you do sign up for on-campus housing, but never showed up for whatever reason (like, maybe you decided not to live on campus) and you don't cancel your contract before the first day of class, you'll be fined -- as of Spring 2018 -- $2350; that's nearly 1.5 lakh rupees!

##### Useful Links
1. UNM Housing [https://housing.unm.edu](https://housing.unm.edu)
2. UNM Housing Contract Cancellation [https://housing.unm.edu/living-on-campus/contract-cancellation.html](https://housing.unm.edu/living-on-campus/contract-cancellation.html)


### Food

Food is NOT included with the accommodation. You have to pay extra to get food on campus.

I assume you are not vegetarian.

There are several different places inside the campus where you'll get food. Some offer just coffee or drinks, some offer sandwiches, and some offer cuisine from around the world.

The major dining hall inside the campus is called 'La Posada' ("LaPo" in short). LaPo is open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. You get different types of predominantly non-vegetarian cuisine.

You have to pay upfront at the beginning of the semester to get food from LaPo. There are different "meal plans". The food is the same for all plans; the difference is in the number of times a day and the number of days a week you can go there.

I chose an unlimited plan -- I can go there all 7 days of the week and as many times a day as I want. For this particular plan, I paid $1950 for the whole semester.

The meal plan is applicable only for LaPo. You have to pay out of your own pocket to eat at other food outlets within the campus.

You can find information about food tariffs [here](https://www.dineoncampus.com/unm/for-residents).

As I'm not crazy about food, I was able to manage just fine. However, if you are a foodie or a vegetarian, perhaps you might want to consider other options.

Instead of choosing a meal plan, you could cook your own food. Get a room with a kitchen. Plan well and the money you save on the meal-plan would offset the higher rent of a room with kitchen.

##### Useful Links
1. UNM Dine On Campus [https://www.dineoncampus.com/unm/](https://www.dineoncampus.com/unm/)
2. [Meal plan information for 2017-2018.](http://lobocard.unm.edu/Dining-club-plans/meal-plans-2017-2018.html)


### Life in Albuquerque

Albuquerque is the largest city in the state of New Mexico. Get rid of any preconveived notions you might have about "cities in America". Albuquerque is not mighty large. I would say it is smaller than Bangalore. Perhaps comparable to Kochi, Kerala.

Though the town is relatively small, it has all the amenities you need. There are several shopping centers, and bus rides within the city is free for UNM students; to avail this facility, you need to get a particular sticker stuck onto your ID. You can get more information on that once you're here.

You could also make use of Uber for transportation within the city.

It is pretty cold during the winter. In January temperatures go well below 0&deg;C degrees at night and upto about 10&deg;C during the day. (Take a walk early in the morning, and you will see small lakes and ponds frozen solid. I'm not exaggerating).

Heaters are in all rooms so you won't have a problem indoors. But you need multiple layers of clothing when stepping out. I recommend thermals, sweaters, thin jacket(s), and a thick jacket capable of widthstanding rain and snow.

Temperatures in summer and early fall ranges from about 18&deg;C to 30&deg;C.  

There are plenty of restaurants in the city. Even a couple of Indian restaurants where the food is good in my opinion. A decent meal costs between $8 and $20. Restaurants here tend to expect a tip, like around 30% of the bill. You don't have to tip if you don't want to. They're aware that international students are usually on a tight budget.

A coffee is between $2 and $5. You would inevitably drink a lot of those 😉.

Your international friends on campus would tell you about a lot more places to go sight-seeing!

Albuquerque has its own airport located about 10 minutes away from UNM.

### Visa

The exact visa you need will be mentioned on the documents that you receive from UNM. It'll most likely be something called "F1 visa" (or J1 if you're coming on an exchange program).

Once you get the documents from UNM, apply for your visa; log in to the official U.S. govt. website and make an appointment with your nearest U.S. Consulate in India.

The visa interview is a two-day process:

* Day 1 -- they take your photograph and fingerprints.
* Day 2 -- an actual interview with an American consular officer.

You have to make appointments for both these things, and it's best if you choose consecutive days for it (you can't do both on a single day, as far as I know).

Don't believe any horror stories other people tell you about visa interviews. Precisely answer any questions they ask you, and you'll be fine. The consular officers were very friendly to me, and I had no trouble at all getting a visa.

There's a fee for the visa-application, which you pay online. I strongly recommend applying for the visa directly, instead of dealing with any middlemen or agencies.

---

The [Global Education Office (GEO)](http://geo.unm.edu/) at UNM handles all things related to international students. Check with them for accurate information and resources.

I guess that's just about it. I hope you have a great time at UNM! Good luck!
