---
layout: post
title: Resolutions 2017
excerpt: My resolutions for the year 2017
tags: js fedora resolutions new-year
---
A new year has begun, and once again I have the opportunity to set my new-year resolutions.

Unlike my resolutions of the past, this one is different in that I have also thought about how exactly I'm going to execute my resolutions.

I'll list out my resolutions up front.

* [Learn JS based web technologies](#i-learn-js-based-web-technologies)
* [Build my own portfolio website and host it on the internet.](#ii-build-and-host-my-own-portfolio-website)
* [Start earning money by writing code](#iii-start-earning-my-own-money)
* [Read six non-fiction books](#iv-read-six-non-fiction-books)
* [Contribute to Fedora](#v-contribute-to-fedora)
* [Learn Hindi](#vi-learn-hindi)

### I. Learn JS based Web Technologies
As an aspiring developer and a computer science student, it's hard not to notice JavaScript. The primary reason I haven't already started learning it seriously (I just know the bare basics) is because I [don't really know where to start](https://hackernoon.com/how-it-feels-to-learn-javascript-in-2016-d3a717dd577f#.5c1ssnglc). JS has practically exploded within a span of a couple of years. There's lots and lots of new frameworks and stuff to get things done. It's scary.

Till now I've been working with other programming languages, such as Python. I have tried learning Django, and have found that it is also somewhat confusing for me. And now that I realize I anyway have to put in tonnes of effort, I decided to spend my efforts learning JS and its associated frameworks rather than the python-based web frameworks.

I wish to learn the whole thing -- front-end, back-end and everything in between, so that I'll be able to build a complete full-stack web application.

As of now, I think it'll be best if I start learning from [FreeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.com/). The only tiny issue with FCC (and most other platforms) is that they assume you know nothing about programming. and make you do all the lame stuff.

But I guess I'll endure; it is only the first fifty or so exercises that are kind of lame. The rest are challenging.

##### Execution plan
Work on the exercises in FCC during the free time I get when I go to college. By the time my spring semester ends in the middle of May, I believe I should've covered enough ground. I'll use the three months of summer break to intensify the learning process.

### II. Build and host my own portfolio website
Basically an extension of the above. Building my own stunning portfolio website would be a great exercise to practice my web-development skills. In addition, this could also be useful once I'm done with my formal education and is hunting for a job.

I intend to host this portfolio website on the internet once I build it, so that other people can see it.

Although I'm aware that several services exist for hosting our own website, I haven't actually done it myself. Things like getting our own domain, registering my own website are all foreign to me. So, this is also a way for me to learn how to actually host a website on the internet.

##### Execution Plan
By the end of June, I should've become more or less at ease with JavaScript and its associated frameworks. Considering my fall semester would begin on mid-August, there's roughly 45 days for me to get a website up and running. I also should've done some interesting projects using JS during my learning phase -- for starters, I'll show off those project on my portfolio page.

I'm not hoping to build a super-fantastic website during my spring break. I'll start off with something simple and basic, and as I learn more, I'll make the changes to my website accordingly. By the end of 2017, I'm hoping to have a sufficiently interesting website.

### III. Start earning my own money
Admit it or not, money is a necessity of life. I'd like to say that I work due to my passion and love for programming, but passion and love alone won't compensate for some of the financial necessities that programmers have. Like money to host my own website, upgrade my hardware etc for instance.

Though I have the option of working at places like gas stations and coffee shops, that's not how I intend to do it.

Instead, I'll do freelance programming jobs to other people. Now, I don't really know how to go about executing this. There are details I still need to work out, like for instance, figuring out whether it's even legal for me to do freelance work from certain countries.

And neither do I aspire for a lot of money at the moment; just enough to cover the costs of my programming activities.

Perhaps if I'm good enough, I might be able to compete in the [Google Summer of Code](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/). They pay an attractive $5500 to succesful applicants.

### IV. Read six non-fiction books
Here's something that doesn't have anything to do with programming.

It is now a widely established fact that all great people in this world read extensively. The [reading lists](http://buffettsbooks.com/books-by-warren-buffett.html) of Warren Buffet, Mark Zuckerberg, [Bill Gates](https://www.gatesnotes.com/Books), and Elon Musk, amongst others, have been publicized online.

As the quote in front of the central library in my alma mater Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham says,
*Read today, lead tomorrow*.

And it's a no-brainer; as you read more, you take into your brain all the ideas, insights, and perspectives of the author

I don't know if 6 seems like a low number. Truth is, I used to be a voracious reader back when I was a small kid. I grew up reading the Harry Potter series, Famous Five, Nancy Drew and many others.

As I grew older, I got busier, and reading took a backseat. These days I read a maximum of 1 or 2 books a year cover-to-cover, which is a pity. I intend to change that, and so I'm choosing a low-enough number (like 6) to begin with. That's one book in two months, which is something I think I can manage.

Though reading fiction is a really nice experience, I'm not fairly convinced that all the growth lies in the non-fiction works, such as biographies, for instance. Gives an insight into the minds of great men; how they made the decisions that they did. For anyone who haven't tried biographies yet, I hightly recommend *[Steve Jobs by Walter Issacson](http://a.co/8JiwEqa)*.

Carrying around a lot of books is usually a pain, especially for international students like me; there are size and weight restrictions on the amount of luggage I can carry around with me. To get around this problem I'm considering getting myself an e-book reader, such as an [Amazon Kindle Paperwhite](http://a.co/5URpreN). So far the reviews have been promising, and though it isn't very common where I live, I had seen a demo-model at the LuluConnect store in [Lulu Mall Kochi](http://lulumall.in/).

Though I spent only about a minute caressing the device, I was impressed. Especially the typeface and the fact that it doesn't hurt your eyes like a typical backlit tablet computer does.

Though there's a hefty price to pay upfront in the case of an ebook reader, you can quickly recover the costs by purchasing the Kindle version of the books you intend to read, which is usually drastically cheaper than an actual physical copy of the book. For instance, the Steve Jobs biography I mentioned earlier costs $11.9 for the paperback and $0.84 for the Kindle version.

Besides, you don't have to worry about carrying around all your bookshelf!

### V. Contribute to Fedora
This one is also a programming task. And this particular task is something I've been putting off for far too long.

Fedora is my preferred linux distro at the moment, and it has remained that way for over a year now, and I would like to do my part in making it better. I think I'll start with packaging. As a matter of fact, there are a couple of softwares on GitHub which I wish to see on the Fedora repositories, so that I (and others) wouldn't have to bother with the intricacies of installing from the source. So maybe I'll try packaging those for Fedora and see how it goes.

In addition, I'm hoping that contributing to open-source projects (such as Fedora) is a great way to enhance my own skill-set and ability to work with existing codebase.

### VI. Learn Hindi
Something I should've done years ago.

Just in case you don't know, Hindi is one of the [official languages of India](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_with_official_status_in_India), and is a widely spoken in the northern region (and I'm from the south).

Though I don't normally have any reason to converse in Hindi (because I'm from the southern part of India where people don't normally converse in Hindi), I wish to learn it so that I can enjoy watching bollywood movies (where people speak in Hindi). As of now, I watch bollywood movies only if it has English subtitles. But then, I end up spending most of my time *reading* subtitles rather than actually *watching* the movie. And that's kind of annoying.

Recently, I was in Lulu PVR to watch *[Dear Zindagi](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5946128/)* starring Alia Bhatt and Shah Rukh Khan, and though there were subtitles initially, it stopped right after the interval; I was left guessing during the entire second half of the movie.

Sure, Hindi was part of my school-curriculum for a couple or more years, but then, I haven't learnt enough Hindi to converse. I know all the letters, and I even know the meaning of several words, but it is hard for me to join those words into meaningful sentences in a reasonable amount of time. Whenever I read or listen to something in Hindi, I'm extremely slow in processing what was being read (or said).

In the coming year, I intend to change all of that. As a matter of fact, I had tried taking a couple of lessions of a free online course in this regaard, and I instantly felt it to be infinitely better than how I'd been taught Hindi at school. In addition, there are mobile apps to aid in learning Hindi, which I intend to make good use of.
