---
layout: post
title: Happy New Year 2017
excerpt: Wish you a happy new year. Here's how I'm gonna improve myself this year.
tags: js fedora resolutions new-year
---
First of all, I wish you a happy and prosperous new year. Make 2017 fabulous!

At the moment I'm at Munnar, Kerala, India. My parents, along with my eldest sister and I have decided to take a small vacation after all the hectic schedules we've been going through recently.

And once again I have the opportunity to set my new-year resolutions.

Unlike my resolutions of the past, this one is different in that I have also thought about how exactly I'm going to achieve them.

I'll list out my resolutions up front.

* [Learn JS based web technologies](#i-learn-js-based-web-technologies)
* [Build my own portfolio website and host it on the internet.](#ii-build-and-host-my-own-portfolio-website)
* [Start earning money by writing code](#iii-start-earning-my-own-money)
* [Read six non-fiction books](#iv-read-six-non-fiction-books)
* [Contribute to Fedora](#v-contribute-to-fedora)
* [Learn Hindi](#vi-learn-hindi)

### I. Learn JS based Web Technologies
As an aspiring developer and a computer science student, it's hard not to notice JavaScript. My excuse for not learning it yet is because I [don't really know where to start](https://hackernoon.com/how-it-feels-to-learn-javascript-in-2016-d3a717dd577f#.5c1ssnglc). JS has practically exploded within a span of a couple of years. Tonnes of new frameworks out everyday. It's scary.

I wish to learn the whole thing -- front-end, back-end and everything in between, so that I'll be able to build complete full-stack web applications.

As of now, I know the bare basics of the language and I think [FreeCodeCamp (FCC)](https://www.freecodecamp.com/) is the best resource at the moment. The only issue with FCC (and most other platforms) is that they assume you know nothing about programming, and make you do all the lame stuff.

But I'll endure; it is only the first fifty or so exercises that are kind of lame. The rest are challenging.

##### Execution plan
Work on the exercises in FCC during the free time I get. I would move to the United States next week for my master's degree education. By the time spring semester ends in the middle of May, I should've covered enough ground. I'll use the three months of summer break to intensify the learning process.

### II. Build and host my own portfolio website
An extension of the above. Building my own stunning portfolio website is a great way to put to practise my newly learned web-development skills.

Maintaining a portfolio can come in handy once I'm done with my formal education and is hunting for a job. I'll host it on the internet so that other people can see it and contact me.

Although I'm aware several services exist to host our own website, I haven't actually done it myself. Things like getting my own domain, registering my own website address are all foreign to me. So this is also an opportunity to learn how to actually host a website on the internet.

##### Execution plan
I expect myself to be at ease with JavaScript and its associated frameworks by the end of June. There's roughly 45 days for me to get a website up and running before my fall semester begins mid-August.

I'll start off with something simple and basic, and improve the website as I learn more. By the end of the year I'm hoping to have a sufficiently interesting portfolio.

### III. Start earning my own money
I hate to admit it but money is a necessity of life. Though I'm passionate about programming, passion alone won't compensate for the financial necessities that programmers have -- money to host my own website, hardware upgrades etc.

I'm attracted to the idea of freelance programming. Now, I don't really know how to go about executing this. There are details I still need to work out, like for instance, figuring out whether it's even legal for me to do freelance work from certain countries (like the United States).

And neither do I aspire for a lot of money at the moment; just enough to cover the costs of my programming activities.

Perhaps if I'm good enough I might be able to compete in the [Google Summer of Code](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/). They pay an attractive $5500 to succesful applicants.

#### Execution Plan
Do freelance programming if it is legal in the country I would be at the time. If it is illegal, wait till I reach back to my home country before I start freelancing.

### IV. Read six non-fiction books
Here's something that doesn't have anything to do with programming.

It is now a widely established fact that nearly all great people in this world read extensively. The [reading lists](http://buffettsbooks.com/books-by-warren-buffett.html) of Warren Buffet, Mark Zuckerberg, [Bill Gates](https://www.gatesnotes.com/Books), and Elon Musk, amongst others, have been publicized online.


As the quote in front of the central library in my alma mater Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham says,
  ```Read today, lead tomorrow.```

It's a no-brainer; as you read more, you take into your brain all the ideas, insights, and perspectives of the author.

I used to be a voracious reader back when I was a small kid, and grew up reading the Harry Potter series, Famous Five, Nancy Drew and many others. As I grew older, I got busier, and reading took a backseat. These days I read a maximum of 1 or 2 books a year cover-to-cover, which is a pity. I want to change that, and so I'm choosing a low-enough number (like 6) to begin with. That's one book in two months -- something I think I can manage.

Though reading fiction is a nice experience, I'm convinced that all the growth lies in the non-fiction works. For instance, biographies give an insight into the minds of great people -- how they made the decisions that they did. In case you have not read it already, I hightly recommend *[Steve Jobs by Walter Issacson](http://a.co/8JiwEqa)*.

Carrying around a lot of books can be annoying especially for international students like me; there are size and weight restrictions on the amount of luggage I can carry around on airplanes. To avoid this issue I'm contemplating on purchasing an e-book reader such as the [Amazon Kindle Paperwhite](http://a.co/5URpreN).

So far the reviews for this little device have been promising, and though it isn't very common where I live, I was impressed by the demo-model at the LuluConnect store in [Lulu Mall Kochi](http://lulumall.in/), especially the typeface and the fact that it doesn't hurt your eyes like a typical backlit tablet computer does.

The hefty price to pay upfront in the case of an ebook reader should be offset by the substantially lower price of Kindle version of the e-books. For instance, the Steve Jobs biography I mentioned earlier costs $11.9 for the paperback and $0.84 for the Kindle version.

Besides, you don't have to worry about carrying around all your bookshelf!

### V. Contribute to Fedora
Something I've been putting off for far too long.

Fedora is my preferred linux distro at the moment. It has remained that way for over a year now, and I would like to do my part in making it better. I'll start with packaging. There are already a couple of softwares on GitHub which I wish to see on the Fedora repositories, so that I (and others) wouldn't have to bother with the intricacies of installing from the source. So maybe I'll try packaging those for Fedora and see how it goes.

In addition, I'm hoping that contributing to open-source projects (such as Fedora) is a great way to enhance my own skill-set and ability to work with existing codebase.

### VI. Learn Hindi
Just in case you don't know, Hindi is one of the [official languages of India](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_with_official_status_in_India), and is widely spoken in the northern region (and I'm from the south).

Though I don't normally have any reason to converse in Hindi (because I'm from the southern part of India where people don't normally converse in Hindi), I wish to learn it so that I can enjoy watching bollywood movies (where people speak in Hindi). As of now, I watch bollywood movies only if it has English subtitles. But then, I end up spending most of my time *reading* subtitles rather than actually *watching* the movie. That's kind of annoying.

Recently, I was in Lulu PVR to watch *[Dear Zindagi](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5946128/)* starring Alia Bhatt and Shah Rukh Khan. There were subtitles initially, but it stopped right after the interval and I was left guessing the entire second half of the movie!

Hindi was part of my school-curriculum for a couple or more years, but then, I haven't learnt enough Hindi to converse. I know all the letters, and I even know the meaning of several words, but it is hard for me to join those words into meaningful sentences in a reasonable amount of time. Whenever I read or listen to something in Hindi, I'm extremely slow in processing what was being read (or said).

In the coming year, I intend to change all of that. As a matter of fact, I had tried taking a couple of lessions of a free online course in this regaard, and I instantly felt it to be infinitely better than how I'd been taught Hindi at school. In addition, there are mobile apps to aid in learning Hindi, which I intend to make good use of.
